On the other hand, we've got the checked exceptions, and we're going to just jump back over to the
employees class again.
Now this guy here files that lines.
Forgive the mess here, but you guys should know this code pretty comfortably by now.
So when we call the files that lines method, we have to do something with the exception that can result
from this call.
We know for a fact the creator of this method line's method knows that it is possible that the path
that we are passing into it might not be a valid path.
And because he or she knew at the time of writing this method that that could happen.
They declared that this method is capable of throwing an Io exception and B and they made their IO exception
class extend not from runtime exception, but directly from exception.
And because it extends directly from exception, it is a checked exception, which means that we have
to do something with it.
OK.
And so what we're doing here is we're surrounding all of this code inside of a try catch block.
All right.
So let me show you an alternative way that we might have done this just so you can see what that might
have looked like.
So we'll jump back over here to the people class.
And let me close this down, and and I'll tell you what we'll do, I'll just make a bunch of empty space
so that I don't have to look at all of that and appear, though we'll do something a little different.
Let's let's call the files the lines method here, and we'll do path.
Of blah blah blah.
Like so.
OK, so you see here that we're getting the red squiggles because we have an unhindered exception.
So we've already seen one of the ways that we can handle this back when we were writing the big data
class, right?
I think we just what do we do?
We put our cursor there, I think, and then I did an option return and then the idea gave me a couple
of options here.
Now, the option that we chose at that time was to surround with try catch right.
And so I'll do that for you here, right?
So we can surround with a try catch and then we could just keep going right?
And I think we did parallel and then we just kept doing stuff here like whatever limit.
Blah blah blah.
Right, and we wrote a bunch of code, right?
And so that's what we did there, and we did that all inside of the try catch.
So that's one that's one way that you could handle this.
However, the other way that we didn't look at because we weren't ready to learn it yet was to add an
exception to the method signature.
So let me show you what that looks like.
Now this looks cleaner, right?
But be careful with this.
So now what we've done is we've just declared to the JVM as a whole that, yeah, yeah, yeah, I know
that the line's method is capable of throwing an exception and I o exception, but I don't want to be
the one to handle that.
So what I'm going to do, I'm saying I from the perspective of the main method here.
What so what I'm going to do is I'm going to take that particular exception if it is thrown and I'm
going to re throw it back to whoever called me.
So whatever code calls the main method?
It will have to handle whatever happens with this exception now.
So we're kind of passing the buck on to the code that called this main method, which in this case is
the AVM itself.
And so the JVM is just going to blow up all the same.
So in this particular case, I suppose you're not really losing much in such a simple program like this.
However, imagine if we were writing a program with a user interface and we asked the user to select
a file, right?
Like it's a graphical program right in like a file open dialogue.
In fact, here I'll show you.
So like in the 80s, here we go to file open.
Right.
Just like that.
And I select some file, and let's say that I select the file that that I don't have permission to open.
OK, maybe the ID doesn't check for that.
Maybe it just blindly tries to go and open that file, right?
So I navigate to some file and and I click open and the program is written in Java.
And so I have code that looks just like this that tries to open up that file.
But the operating system won't allow it because I, the current user of the computer, don't have permissions
to open up that file.
So in that case, presumably an EO exception would be thrown.
Now, should the program just blow up and die?
I don't think so.
It should not blow up and die.
And most well-written programs won't just die or exit exit, right?
Instead, what should happen is I, the user of this program, should be given a message telling me
something.
You know, you don't have permissions to read that file or the program was unable to open that file
something like that.
And then I should be allowed to try again with some other file, right?
So the program doesn't have to just completely die.
It could just give me some feedback that that particular file isn't working for us.
Maybe I can go look at that file and change its permissions or something like that, right?
So if I do this where I just throw this new exception without trying to handle it, in this particular
case, the program is just going to die.
And so that is not a good use of the exception handling at all.
The better thing to do here would have been let me undo this would have been to still use the try catch
surround with try catch.
And now at least I can do something like.
Give the users some feedback like we were unable to open the file.
All right, so now let's try running that because we know that there is no file called blah blah blah.
Let's see.
So no file, blah blah blah.
There we go.
And then we get our stack trace.
Now notice.
In this particular case, the Stack Trace is actually showing us code that is internal to Java.
How do I know that?
Well, I can see right here from the path.
Right?
That's not code that we wrote.
Now here's one thing to be careful of.
I 98 percent of the time, 98 to 99 percent of the time when I am reading a stack trace, I do not jump
into any of the code that is part of Java itself, right?
These are all standard Java classes, part of the Java Library.
I can pretty much assume that there is nothing broken or wrong with any of this code and nine times
out of 10.
Me jumping in to these lines of code isn't going to shed any light on anything.
Is this going to convoluted the problem?
So what I will typically do in this case is I will start at the top, but I will go down until I encounter
code that I wrote right?
Or that was written by me or my team or whatever, right?
And in this case, that would be this line right here.
Line eight.
And in this case, I could see, OK.
There's no file called blah blah blah, right?
So that would be the thought process that I would have.
So I would be automatically skipping over all of these lines until I saw a line with code that I knew
I could do something about, right?
Because I'm not going to be changing.
And in fact, it wouldn't even be able to change any lines of code inside of the Java Standard Library
or any of that, right?
So I would just skip all of these things.
The only reason we're seeing all of this is because the thread got this deep into file related code
before the fundamental root cause of the error actually occurred down here.
OK.
And so we're just seeing the path that the thread took to get to that exception.
A couple other little things I want to show you before wrapping up on this lesson.
There's one more thing that we can add to our try catch blocks, and that is a finally clause.
So we can say finally.
Down here and then we can do something here.
OK, so for example, we could say.
Make sure this runs no matter what.
And I will run that.
All right, and so we see here make sure this runs no matter what.
So what's happening here is that sometimes depending on what you're trying to do inside of your try
block, you may need to clean up or finish up some things before the program completely dies.
Because as we've seen here, in many cases with a try catch block, the program is going to just die.
Even though you may have that catch, you might be handling things in such a way that the program is
still going to just die when it's done OK.
But before it dies, you may feel compelled to clean a few things up.
One example of this would be in some kinds of applications where we might be opening files to read or
write to them, or making connections to databases or things of that sort.
If something goes wrong with any of those opening of connections and files and stuff, we don't want
to just leave the file that we may have been able to open in in in a strange state.
We want to ensure that even if something went wrong while we were reading data from somewhere, even
if something went wrong, we still close that connection or closed that file gracefully and we can do
that in a final block.
So what happens with the final block is that any code that we put here is strongly attempted by the
JVM to be executed regardless of what went wrong in in the try in the try block.
OK, so the house may be on fire, but we're telling the JVM, please try your best to do whatever I
said down here.
Now, with that being said, you'd prefer to avoid doing things in the final block that also are capable
of throwing exceptions, because then that could screw up what?
What's happening with the final block?
There have been cases where you still had to do that.
We might see one of those when we learn about file handling, by the way.
But you generally want to do kind of like last resort types of things down here, like, Hey, clean
up everything.
Hurry up.
Get your stuff out of this house because it's on fire.
Kind of a situation.
Finally, blocks, though, are really useful to guarantee that no matter how bad things are going,
we get one last shot to try some final cleanup.
There's another clause that we can add to try catch blocks now also called a resource, so try with
resources.
We may take a look at that as well in the module where we will learn how to work more with files.
So coming back down here now to the original little try catch code that we had when we were passing
in that number and everything, I just wanted to give a couple a couple of comments on this code.
So because we're dealing with runtime exceptions here that don't need to be caught in the first place,
you may be wondering, well, what do we do to protect ourselves from this type of situation?
And it's actually not that hard to protect ourselves from some of these situations in this particular
case, where we have this code here, that's about to do in a raid length divide by NUM.
We could explicitly just check, you know, we could say something like if NUM.
Is zero then blah blah blah.
I do do some things right?
Or we could even consider if.
NUM is not zero then.
Then we allow that line to be executed.
OK.
And that would protect us from the divide by zero.
Right.
So sometimes you can do some defensive things like this.
And then same thing down here.
Let's see.
We're accessing a value out of this array.
So let's say that this value was inside of a variable.
So I'm going to introduce a variable here.
I'll just call it index.
All right.
So same thing here, we could say something like if if index is less than a raid length less than a
ray length, then there we go.
All right, so let's just kind of look at that.
So we know in this case, three would make this blow up because that would have been the fourth element
in the array and the array only has three elements in it in this particular case.
So what we're effectively saying is if three is less than in this case, three, which it is not, but
if it were, then we would have allowed this to go.
So let me change it this way.
So if this had been a two, which would be valid, right, that would give us the third element in the
array.
If two is less than a at length, which is three, which is true, then go ahead and run this.
So that would have been OK.
So just be really careful when you're dealing with arrays and indexes.
This is not a lesson on arrays, but it's kind of pertinent, right?
Because I'm teaching a little bit of defensive programming techniques here when dealing with the race.
And by the way, I personally rarely actually even use arrays just about any time that I need to have
a collection of things.
I actually use a collections class probably nine point five times out of 10.
Right?
The about the only time that I'm using arrays is when I need to call some old style method or some type
of method that only accepts arrays.
And even then, I'm probably taking a collection class and then converting it into an array so that
I can pass it into that weird method or whatever.
So these are just a couple of examples of trying to utilize more defensive coding in some cases.
Now it's possible to get carried away with this.
I'm not a big fan of having every other line wrapped in some defensive if block.
Don't do that.
You got to try to find a balance, OK?
And I think humans don't do well with balance.
We tend to want to go all the way, one way or all the way the other.
But you've really got to try to find a balance here.
OK.
So I'm not saying that this is a great idea to do in every single case.
I'm not saying that it's a great idea to never do this.
I'm saying kind of write out some code and then gauge how frequently you think certain types of exceptions
or errors could occur and how much of a mess your code is with a million, you know, little if blocks
all over the place to protect yourself from various things, right?
You're just going to have to gauge that.
OK, so in closing, I want to just leave you with a few things that I'm not showing here because this
is a beginner Java programming course, and I don't expect that many of you will be doing the things
that I'm not showing, but I'm going to let you know what I'm not showing here.
I'm not going out of my way right now to teach you the fact that you can create your own exception classes.
But I do want you to be aware of that.
It's actually not that hard.
All you do is create a class that extends either from exception.
If it's something that you feel, people who encounter that exception should be able to recover from
somehow like file i o exceptions and things, then you'll want to extend from the exception class.
If, on the other hand, you think it's something that they may not be able to recover from.
But it still needs to be conveyed that that is an exceptional situation, then you may want to extend
from runtime exception.
OK.
And then the other thing is that when you are creating methods, you can declare that certain methods
will throw certain exceptions, whether they be exceptions that you have created or standard exceptions
that exist within the Java API itself.
And the Java API actually has tons of exceptions.
I would encourage you always to be familiar with a lot of the exceptions that already exist in the Java
API before you decide to just go and create your own exception because there may already be a class
that best represents the situation that you're dealing with.
For example, if you write some method that handles files in some way and you want to handle the circumstance
where some some aspect of handling the file doesn't work anymore, you should really go look at the
i o exception class or other related types of classes first and see if you can simply throw that class
or one of the others before you go, creating a brand new one that might effectively just do about the
same thing anyway.
And then just know that these exception classes are really just informational.
They're not usually meant to do any processing of any kind, OK?
They're just data holders that hold on to whatever pertinent information that might be helpful for someone
to analyze the program when they are later on looking at what went wrong.
OK.
All right.
So with that being said, I am going to bring this lesson to a close and I will see you in the next
one.